all around us throughout the Universe
and at every scale there is continual
change occurring now the kinds of
transformation that are possible in the
circumstances in which they can occur
are governed by the laws of physics
and yet we recognize that there are
fundamental phenomena involving change
which the laws of physics don't seem to
adequately capture for us for example
think about information increasingly our
society is based on information we know
that it can be created that it can flow
and can be transformed but what is its
fundamental nature is there really only
one kind of information or can there be
different kinds here in Oxford my
colleagues David Deutsch and Kiara
maletto with support from the Templeton
World charity Foundation
our endeavoring to create a new language
for physics in which these questions can
be made precise and then fully answered
this endeavor is called Constructor
Theory
[Music]
science
explains the physical world everything
that's out there including ourselves at
the fundamental level in terms of laws
of nature that is Laws of Motion the law
of gravity electricity magnetism and so
on
over the centuries since the Scientific
Revolution one thing that hasn't changed
very much
is the mode of explanation of our
fundamental laws
so for example if we see a comet in the
sky and can measure where it is and
which direction it's going and how fast
we can use the laws of motion to tell us
where it will be at any other time in
the future but sometimes that question
is not the one we want the answer to
sometimes we don't want to know
necessarily where the comet will go if
nothing gets in the way
we want to know where it can be made to
go
given certain resources such as Rockets
Fuel and most importantly knowledge
that is the sort of question that is
addressed by Constructor Theory
now information is essential both in
science and in everyday life
even more so now that we live in a world
where there are billions of computers
all interconnected with one another
what does the existence of information
tell us about the laws of physics
well in constructive theory we can
answer this question exactly
in what we call the constructors here of
information
and with that theory we bring
information directly into fundamental
physics
information is very different from
anything else we have in fundamental
physics it's not an observable it's not
like the velocity or the charge of
particle and it somehow transcends the
physical systems that contain it just
think of a message for example
it can be embodied in the transistors
within a computer it can be spoken aloud
in vibrating molecules of air and it can
even be instantiated in the flags of a
net traffic controller
and yet
the meaning of the message stays the
same if information transcends physical
systems
how can that be
a physical theory of information
how can we free information from its
dependence on particular physical
systems
and yet retain its deep connection with
the laws of physics
well you can't see information in a
physical object unless you also know how
the object could have looked if it had
had other information in it
and that is called the counterfactual
property of information and it is easy
to express in constructive theory
because constructive theory is all about
what is possible and impossible
and the only other thing that's needed
is that the in information when it's
received can be distinguished by the
recipient from all these other possible
ways it could have been and also passed
on to other recipients and that means it
has to be copyable
now these two properties of information
is a counterfactual property and the
copyability are both easy to state in
constructive theoretic terms and without
referring to any particular type of
physical system the very next step
which involves imposing a condition
that's very natural in constructive
theory
leads directly to all the most important
properties of quantum information which
is at the heart of the new and rapidly
growing field of quantum technology so
the constructors here of information
expresses the regularities in the laws
of physics that permit the existence of
information in our universe these
regularities permit things like
computation communication and even the
existence of living organisms which
evidently contain information about
their own design and all these
regularities can be expressed exactly in
terms of possible and impossible
Transformations and this is why
constructive theory suddenly opens the
doors to these Concepts and brings them
directly into fundamental physics
a DNA molecule
is an information storage and retrieval
device
and so is a computer drive that holds
something like the design of a new
iPhone
now these two objects the molecule and
the drive are physically very different
they have in common that they both hold
information
but it's information of a special kind
the kind that can cause transformations
in other objects much larger than
themselves
and we call that kind of information
an abstract Constructor
or knowledge
living things are made of atoms just
like galaxies planets or rocks
but unlike these living things look much
more like designed objects such as cars
Roberts
or iPhones but of course living
organisms haven't been the output of an
intentional design process they haven't
been produced by a factory
now there's a scientific theory Darwin's
theory of evolution that explains how
living organisms can have come about
through the undirected process of
variation and natural selection
the centerpiece of the explanation is a
physical object
it's a DNA sequence that codes for the
organism's design
this is what biologists call a
replicator because it can be copied from
generation to Generation by the cell it
lives in and for replication to be
possible the cell must be capable of
undergoing self-reproduction that is to
say it must be capable of constructing
another instance of itself with high
accuracy
self-reproduction and replication are
the basic mechanisms of life
their accuracy is so remarkable that
some physicists have been wondering
how they can occur with such an accuracy
on the simple laws of physics
constructive theory
explains that they can
and why
an accurate self-reproducing bacterium
must contain a recipe a sequence of
Elementary instructions to construct the
bacterium and that's the fundamental
thing that a bacterium has in common
with say an iPhone Factory
for the Factory The Recipe is the
program that contains the design of an
iPhone
for the bacterium the recipe is the DNA
sequence
and self-reproduction happens by copying
the recipe in the DNA sequence and by
reconstructing the rest of the cell by
executing the recipe step by step
and one such step
that is crucial for high accuracy to be
achieved is Arrow correction error
correction for the bacterium is when
anything that has gone wrong in the copy
of the recipe is corrected
and for the iPhone Factory is quality
control
when full tea and products are discarded
without error correction an arrow
catastrophe would occur
and this is because both the bacterium
and the iPhone
are highly complex structures displace
one small bit and nothing works anymore
which is why things like viruses that
don't use our correction must stay
simple under our laws of physics
and the Striking thing is
all this can be expressed exactly
within fundamental physics
knowledge is Central to constructive
theory
that's because the basic principle of
Constructor theory is that any
transformation that isn't forbidden by
the laws of physics is possible
and that means that it can be performed
in practice given only enough knowledge
so a Constructor Theory can let us
understand how knowledge and knowledge
creating systems such as humans work
constructive theory draws its
fundamental distinction between
Transformations that are possible and
those that are impossible
so constructive theory recasts physics
into a new form capable of tackling
these deep questions like what is
information or what makes complex life
forms possible we believe that
Constructor theory has the potential to
change the way we think about the
universe and our own place within it
foreign
[Music]